>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 12: A MASS
SHOOTING AT AN ORLANDO,
FLORIDA, NIGHTCLUB-- THE WORST
INCIDENCE OF GUN VIOLENCE IN
AMERICAN HISTORY.
>> ALTHOUGH IT'S STILL EARLY IN
THE INVESTIGATION, WE KNOW
ENOUGH TO SAY THAT THIS WAS AN
ACT OF TERROR AND AN ACT OF
HATE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
OUR ENTIRE BROADCAST TONIGHT IS
ABOUT THE MOST LETHAL MASS
SHOOTING IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
IN THE EARLY HOURS AFTER
MIDNIGHT THIS MORNING, A LONE
GUNMAN INSIDE AN ORLANDO,
FLORIDA, NIGHTCLUB BEGAN OPENING
FIRE AT THE CLUB'S PREDOMINANTLY
GAY CLIENTELE.
THE SHOOTER KILLED AT LEAST 50
PEOPLE AND WOUNDED MORE THAN 50
OTHERS BEFORE ORLANDO POLICE
STORMED THE CLUB AND KILLED HIM.
THIS HARD TO BELIEVE DEATH TOLL
IN ORLANDO IS WORSE THAN THE
NUMBER OF INNOCENTS KILLED AT
THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN
NEWTOWN, THE MOVIE THEATER IN
AURORA, COLORADO, THE CAMPUS OF
VIRGINIA TECH AND THE HOLIDAY
PARTY IN SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA, LAST DECEMBER.
PRESIDENT OBAMA-- BRIEFED BY HIS
F.B.I. DIRECTOR AND COUNTER-
TERRORISM ADVISER-- DESCRIBED
THE TRAGEDY AS AN ACT OF TERROR
AND HATE.
THE F.B.I. IS NOW LEADING THE
INVESTIGATION INTO THE SHOOTER'S
MOTIVATIONS AND METHODS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
AROUND 2:00 A.M. INSIDE THE
PULSE NIGHTCLUB, NEAR CLOSING
TIME, AND MORE THAN 300 PATRONS
WERE ABOUT TO CALL IT A NIGHT.
A LONE GUNMAN WAS ALREADY
INSIDE, ARMED WITH AN AR-15
STYLE SEMI-AUTOMATIC RIFLE AND A
HANDGUN, HE HAD PURCHASED
LEGALLY IN THE PAST FEW DAYS.
THE GUNMAN FIRST ENGAGED IN
GUNFIRE WITH AN OFF-DUTY POLICE
OFFICER WORKING SECURITY AT THE
CLUB.
THEN, THE GUNMAN WENT BACK
INSIDE, BEGAN HIS KILLING SPREE,
AND TURNED SURVIVORS INTO
HOSTAGES.
THREE HOURS LATER, AT 5:00 A.M.,
AN ORLANDO POLICE SWAT TEAM
STORMED THE CLUB AND SHOT AND
KILLED THE GUNMAN, BUT NOT
BEFORE THE GUNMAN KILLED AT
LEAST 50 PEOPLE.
IT IS NOT KNOWN AT WHAT POINT
DURING THE ORDEAL THE VICTIMS
WERE KILLED, WHETHER BEFORE OR
AFTER THE SWAT TEAM INTERVENED.
ORLANDO MAYOR BUDDY DYER SAID OF
THE SCENE: "THERE'S BLOOD
EVERYWHERE."
WITNESSES TO THE MASSACRE WERE
IN SHOCK.
ONE SURVIVOR SAID AT FIRST HE
THOUGHT THE GUNFIRE WAS PART OF
THE CLUB'S MUSIC.
>> YOU'D TURN AROUND THE PERSON
NEXT TO YOU IS SCREAMING,
THERE'S BLOOD SPLATTERING, I
DIDN'T KNOW IF IT WAS MINE OR
SOMEBODY ELSE'S, BUT WHEN I GOT
OUT I REALIZED IT WASN'T MINE,
IT WAS SOMEBODY ELSE'S.
THE PERSON I WAS WITH WAS SHOT
IN THE BACK, I HAD TO TAKE MY
BANDANA OFF AND TIE IT AND PUT
IT IN THE BULLET HOLE IN HIS
BACK SO HE WASN'T BLEEDING.
>> WE HAVE STILL FRIENDS IN
THERE.
WE ACTUALLY HAVE TWO FRIENDS IN
ONE HAS A WOUND ON HIS LEG AND
THEN THE OTHER ONE IN THE ARM.
>> Reporter: THE MOTHER OF ONE
MAN TRAPPED INSIDE THE CLUB
SPOKE WITH HER SON DURING THE
SHOOTING.
WHAT DID HE TELL YOU EXACTLY?
>> THAT THE SHOOTER HAS THEM IN
THE WOMEN'S BATHROOM HOSTAGE,
AND HE'S GOING TO DIE.
>> Reporter: THE POLICE CHIEF
SAYS THE SWAT TEAM RESCUED AT
LEAST 30 POTENTIAL VICTIMS WHO
HAD BEEN HELD HOSTAGE.
THE ORLANDO REGIONAL MEDICAL
CENTER TREATED MOST OF THE 53
PEOPLE AUTHORITIES SAY WERE
WOUNDED OR INJURED.
HUNDREDS OF DONORS LINED UP TO
ANSWER AN URGENT APPEAL FOR
BLOOD TO HELP DOCTORS TREAT THE
DOZENS OF WOUNDED.
>> WE HAVE SPENT THE MORNING ON
A NUMBER OF VICTIMS.
WE CONTINUE TO OPERATE ON THEM.
WE HAVE FOUND MANY OF THEM ARE
CRITICALLY ILL AS A RESULT OF
THEIR INJURIES.
THE F.B.I. ALSO CONFIRMED THAT
OMAR MATEEN LIVED IN FORT
PIERCE, FLORIDA, ABOUT 90 MILES
SOUTHEAST OF ORLANDO.
THE F.B.I. ALSO CONFIRMED THAT
IT INVESTIGATED MATEEN TWICE IN
THE LAST TWO YEARS, IN
THE PAST FEW YEARS, IN 2013 FOR
MAKING INFLAMMATORY COMMENTS TO
CO-WORKERS, AND IN 2014, FOR
ALLEGED TIES TO A SUICIDE
BOMBER.
BOTH TIMES, MATEEN WAS CLEARED.
THE F.B.I. CONFIRMED MATEEN MADE
A 9-1-1 CALL RIGHT BEFORE THE
SHOOTING AND TALKED ABOUT THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP, OR ISIS.
>> THERE WERE 911 CALLS IN WHICH
THERE WAS CONVERSATION BETWEEN
THE SUBJECT AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT REPRESENTATIVES, 911
DISPATCHERS.
I HAVE NOT LISTENED TO THEM, BUT
IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING IT WAS
GENERAL TO THE ISIS STATE.
>> Reporter: TODAY, THE ISIS
NEWS AGENCY CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK,
DESCRIBING MATEEN AS AN ISLAMIC
STATE FIGHTER, BUT THIS CLAIM
HAS NOT BEEN CONFIRMED.
POLICE SEARCHED THE VAN PARKED
BY THE SHOOTER OUTSIDE THE CLUB.
THEY DID NOT FIND ANY EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES OR BOOBY TRAPS INSIDE
THE CLUB.
AS PART OF THE INVESTIGATION,
POLICE SURROUNDED AND
SEARCHED THE HOME OF MATEEN'S
PARENTS IN FORT PIERCE.
NBC NEWS REPORTED THAT WHEN IT
REACHED MATEEN'S FATHER ON THE
PHONE THIS MORNING, MIR
SEDDIQUE, SAID, "WE ARE IN SHOCK
LIKE THE WHOLE COUNTRY" AND "WE
ARE SAYING WE ARE APOLOGIZING
FOR THE WHOLE INCIDENT."
ACCORDING TO NBC, THE FATHER
ALSO SAID THE SHOOTING HAD
NOTHING TO WITH RELIGION, BUT
HIS SON HAD BEEN ANGERED WHEN HE
RECENTLY SAW TWO MEN KISSING.
ORLANDO POLICE CHIEF JOHN MINA
URGED ANYONE WHO WAS IN THE
PULSE NIGHTCLUB LAST NIGHT AT
ANY TIME TO CALL THE
AUTHORITIES.
>> WHAT WE NEED TO DO IS
CONTINUE TO BE VIGILANT AND CALL
IF YOU SEE SOMETHING, SAY
SOMETHING.
CALL ANYONE-- CALL 911, CALL THE
FBI.
IF YOU SEE SOMETHING OUT OF
PLACE, OR YOU SEE SOMEONE THAT'S
ACTING STRANGE, STRANGE
BEHAVIOR.
>> Sreenivasan: AT THE WHITE
HOUSE THIS AFTERNOON, PRESIDENT
OBAMA SPOKE ABOUT THE ORLANDO
MASSACRE, BUT DID NOT TAKE ANY
QUESTIONS.
HERE IS PART OF HIS STATEMENT.
>> THIS IS AN ESPECIALLY
HEARTBREAKING DAY FOR ALL OUR
FRIENDS-- OUR FELLOW AMERICANS--
WHO ARE LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL
OR TRANSGENDER.
THE SHOOTER TARGETED A NIGHTCLUB
WHERE PEOPLE CAME TOGETHER TO BE
WITH FRIENDS, TO DANCE AND TO
SING, AND TO LIVE.
THE PLACE WHERE THEY WERE
ATTACKED IS MORE THAN A
NIGHTCLUB-- IT IS A PLACE OF
SOLIDARITY AND EMPOWERMENT WHERE
PEOPLE HAVE COME TOGETHER TO
RAISE AWARENESS, TO SPEAK THEIR
MINDS, AND TO ADVOCATE FOR THEIR
CIVIL RIGHTS.
SO THIS IS A SOBERING REMINDER
THAT ATTACKS ON ANY AMERICAN--
REGARDLESS OF RACE, ETHNICITY,
RELIGION OR SEXUAL ORIENTATION--
IS AN ATTACK ON ALL OF US AND ON
THE FUNDAMENTAL VALUES OF
EQUALITY AND DIGNITY THAT DEFINE
US AS A COUNTRY.
AND NO ACT OF HATE OR TERROR
WILL EVER CHANGE WHO WE ARE OR
THE VALUES THAT MAKE US
AMERICANS.
TODAY MARKS THE MOST DEADLY
SHOOTING IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
THE SHOOTER WAS APPARENTLY ARMED
WITH A HANDGUN AND A POWERFUL
ASSAULT RIFLE.
THIS MASSACRE IS THEREFORE A
FURTHER REMINDER OF HOW EASY IT
IS FOR SOMEONE TO GET THEIR
HANDS ON A WEAPON THAT LETS THEM
SHOOT PEOPLE IN A SCHOOL, OR IN
A HOUSE OF WORSHIP, OR A MOVIE
THEATER, OR IN A NIGHTCLUB.
AND WE HAVE TO DECIDE IF THAT'S
THE KIND OF COUNTRY WE WANT TO
BE.
AND TO ACTIVELY DO NOTHING IS A
DECISION AS WELL.
IN THE COMING HOURS AND DAYS,
WE'LL LEARN ABOUT THE VICTIMS OF
THIS TRAGEDY.
THEIR NAMES.
THEIR FACES.
WHO THEY WERE.
THE JOY THAT THEY BROUGHT TO
FAMILIES AND TO FRIENDS, AND THE
DIFFERENCE THAT THEY MADE IN
THIS WORLD.
SAY A PRAYER FOR THEM AND SAY A
PRAYER FOR THEIR FAMILIES, THAT
GOD GIVE THEM THE STRENGTH TO
BEAR THE UNBEARABLE.
AND THAT HE GIVE US ALL THE
STRENGTH TO BE THERE FOR THEM,
AND THE STRENGTH AND COURAGE TO
CHANGE.
WE NEED TO DEMONSTRATE THAT WE
ARE DEFINED MORE-- AS A COUNTRY
-- BY THE WAY THEY LIVED THEIR
LIVES THAN BY THE HATE OF THE
MAN WHO TOOK THEM FROM US.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR FURTHER
PERSPECTIVE AND THE LATEST
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE MASS
SHOOTING AT THE ORLANDO
NIGHTCLUB, I AM JOINED BY SKYPE
BY THE MANAGING EDITOR OF "THE
ORLANDO SENTINEL," JOHN CUTTER.
JOHN, I KNOW IT'S A BUSY DAY IN
YOUR NEWSROOM, BUT NOW ORLANDO
JOINS A HORRIBLE LIST, NEWTOWN,
CONNECTICUT, AURORA, COLORADO,
SAN BERNARDINO.
ORLANDO IS NOW ON THAT LIST FOR
A VERY BAD REASON.
>> I KNOW, AND THAT'S ACTUALLY
SOMETHING THAT WE TALKED ABOUT
VERY EARLY TODAY.
ORLANDO IS OFTEN THE KIND OF
PLACE THAT GETS MENTIONED AS A
POTENTIAL TARGET BECAUSE WE ARE
SUCH A VACATION DESTINATION, SO
YOU NEVER WANT IT TO HAPPEN
CERTAINLY.
YOU NEVER EXPECT IT TO HAPPEN.
BUT I KNOW LAW ENFORCEMENT FELT
IT WAS PREPARED AND, YOU KNOW,
NOW WE JOIN THAT LIST.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL US A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE ORLANDO
COMMUNITY.
IT HAS A HISTORY OF BEING
INCLUSIVE.
>> IT DOES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE OFTEN
LIKE TO SAY TO PEOPLE WHEN THEY
COME HERE, SAY, FOR A JOB
INTERVIEW IS THAT THIS IS A VERY
INCLUSIVE COMMUNITY.
IT'S MUCH MORE DIVERSE THAN SOME
OTHER PARTS OF FLORIDA.
THERE IS A LARGE, THRIVING AND
LOVING GAY COMMUNITY, AND THIS
INCIDENT HAPPENED DURING A LATIN
NIGHT AT THE CLUB, AND OBVIOUSLY
THIS IS A VERY DIVERSE AREA.
THERE'S A LARGE GROUP OF
SPANISH-SPEAKING RESIDENTS, BOTH
AMERICANS AND PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MOVED HERE, SO IT SORT OF HITS
RIGHT AT THE HEART OF SOME OF
OUR MOST IMPORTANT PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: REPORTERS HAVE
BEEN OUT COVERING THIS ALL DAY.
WHAT STICKS OUT TO YOU?
I MEAN, I'VE SEEN IMAGES OF
PEOPLE LINING UP AT THE BLOOD
BANK TO DONATE, FOR EXAMPLE.
>> YOU KNOW, A COUPLE OF THINGS
STICK OUT.
ONE IS AS I REALIZE HOW MUCH
THIS TOUCHES EVERYONE AS SOON AS
I ARRIVED IN THE NEWSROOM VERY
EARLY THIS MORNING, ONE OF OUR
FOLKS WAS CLOSE TO TEARS BECAUSE
SHE HAD NOT YET HEARD FROM A
FRIEND.
WE HAD A LOT OF THAT KIND OF
THING HAPPENING IN OUR NEWSROOM
AND OBVIOUSLY ACROSS THE
COMMUNITY.
I DON'T THINK WE'LL ALL HAVE TO
GO VERY FAR BEFORE WE FIND
SOMEONE WHO WAS EITHER IN THE
CLUB OR SADLY A VICTIM.
BUT THE RESPONSE TO THE CALL FOR
BLOOD WAS AMAZING.
I MEAN, THEY ACTUALLY HAD TO
START TURNING PEOPLE AWAY.
POLICE EVEN TALKED ABOUT HOW
PEOPLE WERE BRINGING WATER AND
FOOD DOWN TO AUTHORITIES AND
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WHO
WERE WAITING FOR NEWS THERE.
THAT'S AN INSPIRING THING TO SEE
ON AN AWFUL DAY LIKE THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE ISLAMIC
COMMUNITY IN CENTRAL FLORIDA AND
THE GENERAL POPULATION?
>> IT STRUCK ME, IT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT THAT THE IMAM HERE WAS
VERY EARLY AT A PRESS CONFERENCE
TALKING ABOUT INCLUSIVENESS AND
OUTREACH.
THEY'VE BEEN VERY ACTIVE WITH
THE COMMUNITY.
THERE ARE INTERFAITH GROUPS THAT
HAVE HAD REGULAR MEETINGS,
WORRIED ABOUT ISLAMOPHOBIA AND
HAVE TRIED THE MAKE CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN THE GROUPS FOR JUST A
CIRCUMSTANCE LIKE THIS, SO THEY
COULD BE READY TO RESPOND AND
REMIND PEOPLE THAT THIS IS ABOUT
APPARENTLY ONE MAN AND NOT ABOUT
A COMMUNITY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DO WE
KNOW ABOUT THE PLACE WHERE HE
CAME FROM?
THE SUBURB OUTSIDE OF ORLANDO?
>> IT'S ABOUT AN HOUR AND A HALF
FROM HERE.
IT'S OFF OF A COUPLE OF OUR
MAJOR ROADS.
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN HERE AND DRIVEN
DOWN THE FLORIDA TURNPIKE, IT'S
RIGHT AROUND THERE, FORT PIERCE,
THAT AREA.
LIKE A LOT OF FLORIDA, IT HAS
MANY PEOPLE FROM OTHER PLACES,
PEOPLE WHO MOVE HERE FOR LOTS OF
REASONS.
AND WHY THIS PERSON ENDED UP
GOING FROM APPARENTLY AN HOUR
AND A HALF DOWN AND COMING TO
ORLANDO TO COMMIT THIS ACT IS
SOMETHING THAT THE AUTHORITIES
DON'T YET KNOW.
>> Sreenivasan: ALREADY, JOHN
CUTTER, MANAGING EDITOR OF THE
ORLANDO "THE
ORLANDO SENTINEL," THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
NOTED THAT TODAY'S MASS SHOOTING
IS ESPECIALLY PAINFUL FOR GAY
AND LESBIAN AMERICANS AS A CLUB
WHERE THEY SOCIALIZED IN
SOLIDARITY WAS THE TARGET.
TO DISCUSS WHAT THE ORLANDO MASS
SHOOTING MEANS FOR THE L.G.B.T.
COMMUNITY, I AM JOINED BY CARLOS
SMITH, FROM "EQUALITY FLORIDA,"
A GROUP THAT FIGHTS FOR L.G.B.T.
RIGHTS.
TELL US A BIT ABOUT THE
COMMUNITY THEY WAS AFFECTED
TODAY.
>> SURE.
WELL, OUR ENTIRE COMMUNITY IS
DEVASTATED, AND EQUALITY FLORIDA
SENDS ITS THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS
TO ALL OF THOSE WHO WERE
AFFECTED BY THIS TRAGEDY.
THIS TRAGEDY HAPPENED AT A
POPULAR NIGHTCLUB, PULSE
ORLANDO, A GAY NIGHTCLUB.
IT HAPPENED DURING L.G.B.T.Q.
PRIDE MONTH.
IT HAPPENED AT A TIME WHEN THE
CLUB WAS AT MAXIMUM CAPACITY.
SO IT'S CLEAR THAT THE SHOOTER
HAD EVERY INTENT OF INFLICTING
THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF VIOLENCE
AND DAMAGE.
AND I THINK WHAT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND IS THAT
THE L.G.B.T.Q. COMMUNITY HAS
GONE TO GAY NIGHTCLUBS LIKE
PULSE ORLANDO AND PLACES AROUND
THE COUNTRY FOR DECADES, SINCE
THE DAYS OF STONEWALL, AS A
PLACE WHERE PEOPLE CAN BE SAFE,
AS A PLACE WHERE PEOPLE CAN WITH
WHO THEY ARE AND HAVE A SENSE OF
COMMUNITY.
SO WE'RE DEVASTATED TO SEE THIS
TYPE OF VIOLENCE, BUT I THINK
IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT THAT PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND THAT THE CENTRAL
FLORIDA L.G.B.T.Q. COMMUNITY IS
STANDING IN SOLIDARITY ALSO WITH
THE MUSLIM AND ISLAMIC
COMMUNITY.
BOTH OF OUR COMMUNITIES HAVE
BEEN TARGETS OF VIOLENCE, OF
HATE AND OF DISCRIMINATION.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
HISTORY OF DISPROPORTIONATE
DISCRIMINATION OR JUST ANY
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST THE
L.G.B.T. COMMUNITY IN FLORIDA,
IN CENTRAL FLORIDA?
>> WELL, WHAT WE'VE SEEN
UNFORTUNATELY IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS IS THERE HAS BEEN A
RASH OF VIOLENCE, PARTICULARLY
AGAINST TRANSGENDER WOMEN OF
COLOR.
THERE WAS A HATE CRIME MURDER
INCIDENT THAT HAPPENED ACTUALLY
RECENTLY IN FLORIDA THAT WAS
DEVASTATING TO THE COMMUNITY
THAT TARGETED A TRANSGENDER
BLACK WOMAN.
AND WHAT WE'RE SEEING NOW IS
THAT EVEN IN THE YEAR 2016, HATE
AND BIGOTRY STILL EXISTS.
AND WE'RE DOING WHAT WE CAN IN
OUR COMMUNITIES, AT THE LOCAL
LEVEL, AT THE STATE LEVEL, AT
THE NATIONAL LEVEL, TO ERADICATE
ALL FORMS OF HATE AND
DISCRIMINATION AND TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE FIGHT AGAINST ALL
PHOBIAS, NOT JUST HOMOPHOBIA,
NOT JUST TRANSPHOBIA, BUT ALSO
AGAINST ISLAMOPHOBIA.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
IN A HEALING PROCESS WHEN IT
AFFECTS SO MANY PEOPLE?
BESIDES THE 50 DEAD AND ANOTHER
50 INJURED, ALL OF THOSE
INDIVIDUALS HAVE A RIPPLE EFFECT
THROUGHOUT THE MUCH LARGER
COMMUNITY?
>> I THINK WHAT HAPPENS IS WE
COME TOGETHER AND WE GRIEVE
TOGETHER AS AMERICANS.
AND IT'S NOT JUST ABOUT THE
L.G.B.T.Q. COMMUNITY.
IT'S ALSO ABOUT THE LATINO
COMMUNITY.
THIS HAPPENED AT A NIGHTCLUB ON
LATINO NIGHT, AND IT WAS A NIGHT
WHERE THERE WERE MANY
L.G.B.T.Q., LATINOS AND ALLIES
WHO WERE THERE WHO ARE
DEVASTATED.
AND I THINK IT NOW IS A TIME TO
HAVE CONVERSATIONS WITH ONE
ANOTHER ABOUT INCLUSIVITY, ABOUT
PUSHING BACK ON SOME OF THE
RHETORIC THAT WE'RE HEARING
AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: CARLOS, DID
YOU KNOW ANY OF THE PEOPLE THAT
WERE AFFECTED?
>> I DON'T KNOW IF I DO.
I WOKE UP THIS MORNING TO THIS
NIGHTMARE, AND I IMMEDIATELY
CHECKED IN WITH ALL OF MY
CLOSEST FRIENDS AND FAMILY AND
REACHED OUT TO THE PEOPLE THAT I
THOUGHT TO REACH OUT TO, AND
EVERYONE THAT I REACHED OUT TO
IMMEDIATELY WAS SAFE.
THE L.G.B.T.Q. COMMUNITY IN
ORLANDO IS VERY TIGHT.
WE'RE VERY STRONG.
WE'RE A VERY CLOSE COMMUNITY.
AND MY THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS ARE
WITH THOSE WHO KNOW PEOPLE WHO
WERE IMPACTED BY THIS TRAGEDY.
I CAN'T EVEN IMAGINE THAT I WAS
AT THE L.G.B.T.Q. CENTER JUST A
FEW MOMENTS AGO BEFORE WE
STARTED THIS INTERVIEW AND RAN
INTO FRIENDS WHO DO KNOW PEOPLE
WHO DIED.
I'M JUST CONSOLING THEM THE BEST
THAT I KNOW HOW, AND WE'RE GOING
TO GET THROUGH THIS TOGETHER AS
A COMMUNITY BECAUSE WE'RE
STRONG.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
CARLOS SMITH FROM EQUALITY
FLORIDA, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: AT THIS TIME,
THERE ARE MORE QUESTIONS THAN
ANSWERS ABOUT THE HORRIBLE MASS
SHOOTING AT THE ORLANDO
NIGHTCLUB.
JOINING ME FROM WASHINGTON TO
DISCUSS THE BROADER IMPLICATIONS
OF TODAY'S TRAGEDY IS STEPHEN
BIDDLE OF THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN
RELATIONS.
SO STEPHEN, WE'RE HEARING
REPORTS FROM DIFFERENT NEWS
AGENCIES THAT THE INDIVIDUAL
RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS CLAIMED
ALLEGIANCE TO ISIS ON A 911
CALL.
WE'RE HEARING THAT ISIS NEWS
AGENCY, IF YOU CAN CALL IT THAT,
IS TAKING RESPONSIBILITY.
PUTTING ALL THIS INTO
PERSPECTIVE, HOW OFTEN DO THESE
ATTACKS HAPPEN?
>> TERRORIST ATTACKS ARE QUITE
COMMON WORLDWIDE.
TERRORIST ATTACKS AGAINST
AMERICANS AND ESPECIALLY IN THE
UNITED STATES ARE VERY UNCOMMON.
MASS SHOOTINGS REGRETTABLY ARE
QUITE COMMON.
TERRORIST ATTACKS BY ISLAMISTS
AGAINST AMERICANS ARE QUITE
UNCOMMON.
IN FACT, SINCE 2001, ONLY ABOUT
100 AMERICANS HAVE BEEN KILLED
BY INTERNATIONAL TERRORISTS.
IN STATISTICAL TERMS IT'S
ACTUALLY MORE LIKELY THAN AN
AMERICAN WILL BE KILLED IN A
LIGHTNING STRIKE THAN AN
INTERNATIONAL TERRORIST.
EVEN IN 2001, WORST YEAR IN
AMERICAN HISTORY FOR DEATHS OF
AMERICAN TO INTERNATIONAL
TERRORISM, AS HORRIBLE AS THE
WORLD TRADE CENTER AND PENTAGON
ATTACKS WERE, MORE AMERICANS
WERE KILLED BY PEPTIC ULCERS
IN THAT YEAR THAN BY
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISTS.
IN TERMS OF THE OBJECTIVE
MAGNITUDE OF THREAT TO AMERICAN
LIVES AND PROPERTY POSED BY
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM, IT HAS
NOT BEEN LARGE.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT AFTER
SEPTEMBER 11th AMERICA DOES
NOT LAUNCH A WAR ON PEPTIC
ULCERS FROM TRYING TO PREVENT
THAT FROM HAPPENING AGAIN.
WE CREATE THE GLOBAL WAR ON
TERROR THAT IS CONTINUING, BUT
IN PRACTICAL TERMS, EVEN IF
THESE ARE LONE WOLF ATTACKS, HOW
DO WE PREVENT AGAINST SOMETHING
LIKE THIS HAPPENING AGAIN?
>> THE LONE WOLF ATTACKS IN
PARTICULAR ARE REALLY DEVILISHLY
DIFFICULT PROBLEMS TO DEAL WITH.
YOU'RE DEALING BY DEFINITION
WITH TINY NUMBERS OF
INDIVIDUALS.
WE COULD RESPOND EVEN MORE
FORCEFULLY TO THE TERRORISM
THREAT IN THE UNITED STATES THAN
WE HAVE, AND IT'S WORTH NOTING
THAT WE'VE SPENT $1 TRILLION IN
COUNTER-TERRORISM SINCE 2001.
IT'S NOT LIKE THE UNITED STATES
HAS DONE NOTHING.
YOU CAN ALWAYS DO MORE, THE
PROBLEM IS THERE ARE TRADE-OFFS
ASSOCIATED WITH DOING MORE THAT
CAN SOMETIMES MAKE THE RESPONSE
WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM THAT IT'S
TRYING TO SOLVE.
SO TAKE, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
PROBLEM OF LONE WOLVES IN THE
UNITED STATES RESPONDING TO A
GENERIC CALL OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE TO ACT AGAINST AMERICANS.
THERE ARE TINY MINORITY OF
MUSLIMS IN THE UNITED STATES
ENGAGED IN TERRORIST ACTIVITY.
IF WE ENGAGE IN MORE
FORCEFUL SURVEILLANCE ACTIVITIES
TO REDUCE THIS TINY NUMBER INTO
A TINIER NUMBER, WE RUN THE RISK
OF PERSUADING THIS LARGER
FRACTION TO THINK THE UNITED
STATES ISN'T WITH THEM.
THAT'S A MUCH GREATER THREAT
THAN ONE OR TWO LONE WOLF
ATTACKS OF A KIND THAT ARE VERY
DIFFICULT TO STOP.
THIS IS A PROBLEM WHERE IN ALL
LIKELIHOOD SOME KIND OF VERY LOW
LEVEL BUT CHRONIC TERRORIST
THREAT OF OCCASIONAL ACTS OF
THIS KIND IS PROBABLY SOMETHING
THE AMERICAN PUBLIC IS GOING TO
HAVE TO LIVE WITH FOR QUITE SOME
TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: IT SEEMS THE
TRILLION DOLLARS WE MIGHT HAVE
SPENT IS NOW MUCH BETTER AT
SPOTTING CELLS AND GROUPS OF
PEOPLE WHO ARE COMMUNICATING AND
PLOTTING AND CONSPIRING IN A
PARTICULAR ACT THAN IT IS THE
INDIVIDUAL THAT DECIDES THIS IS
THE DAY THAT I WANT TO ALIGN
MYSELF WITH THIS IDEOLOGY AND DO
WHAT I NEED TO DO.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
I MEAN, BY DEFINITION, LONE
WOLVES WHO ARE INSPIRED BY BUT
NOT DIRECTED BY FOREIGN
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS ARE
EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT TO
SPOT IN ADVANCE OF WHAT THEY
CHOOSE TO DO.
THEY DON'T LEAVE LARGE
FOOTPRINTS.
THEY DON'T ENGAGE IN ACTIVITIES
THAT TEND TO MAKE THEM EASY TO
SPOT AND EASY TO TAKE ACTION
AGAINST, AND IF WE TRY AND GET
MORE INFORMATION ON THEM, AGAIN,
WHAT WE END UP DOING IS BEING
MORE INTRUSIVE IN OUR
SURVEILLANCE IN A WAY THAT
AFFECTS FAR MORE PEOPLE WHO
AREN'T GOING TO BECOME
TERRORISTS THAN THOSE WHO DO.
SO ALL OF THESE THINGS INVOLVE A
CAREFUL BALANCE.
IT'S VERY, VERY EASY TO FALL OFF
THAT BALANCE, ESPECIALLY IN THE
AFTERMATH OF AN ATTACK LIKE
THIS, IN THE DIRECTION OF A
RESPONSE THAT MAKES THE PROBLEM
WORSE AND NOT BETTER.
>> Sreenivasan: STEPHEN
BIDDLE FROM THE COUNCIL ON
FOREIGN RELATIONS.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
THE DEADLIEST MASS SHOOTINGS IN
AMERICA.
READ OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, ORLANDO
HAS BEGUN IDENTIFYING THE 50
PEOPLE KILLED.
THEIR NAMES ARE BEING POSTED AT
CITYOFORLANDO.NET/VICTIMS.
AMONG THEM, 23-YEAR-OLD
STANLEY, A PHARMACY TECHNICIAN
SHOT THREE TIMES.
34-YEAR-OLD EDWARD SOTOMAYOR JR.
WAS A NATIONAL BRAND MANAGER FOR
A TRAVEL AGENCY.
HIS EMPLOYER SAID ON HIS
FACEBOOK PAGE IT WAS ONE OF THE
SADDEST DAYS OF HIS LIFE.
FOLLOW OUR CONTINUING COVERAGE
ONLINE AT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION ON
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.